Once around 47 Ursa Majorus.
So this is a star magnitude five. So
just visible to the naked eye down near
the paws, the hind legs of the great
bear in the constellation Ursa Major.
You can see it ringed in yellow with the
red arrow pointing at it. Um and it is a
target that you can go and find quite
easily with an amateur telescope.
It's one of the sun's near neighbors.
The GIA mission has been able to measure
the parallax
as 72 mas mill arc seconds. So 72,000
of an arcsec.
Tremendous precision that these things
are able to achieve these days. And that
gives us a distance of just 45 light
years which puts it really very close
indeed in terms of the size of our
galaxy which is around about a 100,000
light years across. So one of the sun's
near neighbors and it's been given a
name. It's called Chalawan
named after the mythic crocodile king in
the Thai folktale Krathong.
And these names have been agreed by the
International Astronomical Union. They
set up a working group on star names and
in fact on exoplanet names as well. And
so they've agreed a whole slew of these
names in the last 10 years. And this
particular one was put forward by the
Thailand Astronomical Society. And I
think that's a excellent way for these
names to get defined. Going to be hard
to remember them all.
It's a yellow dwarf star very similar to
the sun just 102%
that of the mass of soul and that puts
it into class G2
uh G25 the V there is the Roman numeral
five which means type five and that is
actually the class for an ordinary main
sequence star so our son soul is G2V and
is in the next category down that 2% of
mass makes a bit of a difference. It's
also slightly hotter. So, 5,880
Kelvin. So, what is it? 100° hotter than
the sun. And slightly richer in metals.
105% of the iron content uh visible in
the spectrum.
Now, it's actually about 6 billion years
old. So got about 1 to one and a half
billionyear head start on the sun in
terms of its evolution. Now that doesn't
make any difference with a small star
like this to the metal content. The iron
and other heavier elements like that are
only cooked up in supernovi and the very
final stages of really giant stars. None
are made by these little tiny dwarf
stars like the sun. they will uh turn
hydrogen to helium and maybe make a
little bit of carbon um in their final
stages right in the core, a little bit
of oxygen and not much else, but they
certainly won't be adding to the iron.
So, this has picked up the iron content
from its formation. And that's
interesting that it's richer in iron
because it's older. And so the region of
gas that it collapsed from must have
been more dense in those heavy elements
despite having uh that billionyear older
age. And so in general the universe
would have been on average freer of such
heavy elements at the time. So it just
goes to show that you can't always rely
on the metal content to really give you
uh the age of a star.
Now it's got some planets. The first
one, planet B, lowerase for planets.
Don't know why they don't use lowercase
A because uppercase A is used for stars.
Anyway, it's B. In 1996, it was found by
Marci and Butler using the radial
velocity method. So looking at the
movement induced in the star rather than
the planet as the planet orbits around
the planet's gravity pulls on the star
and the star moves slightly towards or
away depending on the position and
motion of the planet and that causes a
change in the Doppler shift which we can
see in the spectrum of the star and you
need very sensitive equipment to do that
but you can get a very very accurate
readings on it these days and compute
that uh the star is moving with a
certain velocity and a certain period.
That gives us the three-year orbit for
this planet. And the amount that it's
moving, we can tell because of Kepler's
laws. It must weigh in at about 2 1/2
times the mass of Jupiter. So, a super
Jupiter sized planet.
Now, a three-year orbit around a star
that's essentially the same mass as our
sun puts it at the distance that our
asteroid belt would be from the star.
So, uh, between Mars and Jupiter. Mars
takes 2 years, Jupiter takes five. So,
it's somewhere in between roughly where
the asteroid belt would be if this was
our solar system. And that's quite close
in for such a massive planet.
Now in 2002 a second planet was
announced also by Marcian Butler but
this time led by Deborah Fischer also
using the radial velocity method and
this is a bit further out taking 6 1/2
years to do an orbit and that puts it in
an approximate 5-2 ratio just like
Jupiter and Saturn. So, uh, planet B
does five laps for every two laps that
planet C does and that keeps a very
stable configuration
stabilizing the orbits. Now, I say that,
but when you read up on this, you will
find that there is quite a lot of
confusion with different methods having
been used to determine the orbit of
planet C with a whole lot of different
numbers given. But uh the final sort of
outcome of this seems to be uh what I'm
saying here.
Now these planets have been given names.
Again the international astronomical
union approved in December 2015 the two
Thai names to go with the uh name
Chaliwan for the star from the Krythong
uh mystery. They approved Tapa Thong and
Tapa Cao. And my Thai pronunciation is
no doubt terrible. So, somebody will
correct me. But, uh, it's it's an
interesting idea that we are gradually
coming up with names for planets around
these other stars. Something that I
never thought I would see in my
lifetime.
And since then, we have discovered a
third planet which currently doesn't
have a name. Uh, it's just given the
designation D. This was detected in the
data in 2010 again by Deborah Fischer
and her collaborator Gregory. And this
too is 1.6 times the mass of Jupiter in
a 38-year long orbit at 11.6
astronomical units. So it's a again a
super Jupiter planet but in a Saturnike
orbit around the star. So there are
three giants and the map of the system
as best we know it now is probably like
this with uh the orbits of planets B, C
and D shown around the star there and
their relative sizes and you can see
this the numbers there in terms of
orbital periods and orbital distances.
So again various different numbers are
given for those and there there is some
uncertainty in this. It's hard to see
quite how with a 38-year long orbit
we've got enough data to really be able
to identify the uh presence of planet D
quite an amazing achievement if it turns
out to be true.
But the real question is from our point
of view is this rather solar system like
uh arrangement with a number of giant
planets orbiting out in the outer system
um going to support any terrestrial
planets interior and first point we
haven't found any. So, this is a
simulated map of where there might be
stable terrestrial planet orbits. And
we've got the giant planets A and B
marked on the map here. And then a
stable orbit for a terrestrial planet
that is possible just on the inner edge
of the habitable zone, which is that
gray ring. That's the region at which
liquid water could exist because of the
heat from the star. Go any closer, too
hot, go any further out, too cold in the
habitable zone. It's the Goldilock zone.
Just right. Now,
the reason that that's drawn there is
that planet B orbiting just at the outer
edge of the habitable zone and being 2
and a half times the mass of Jupiter is
likely to have a huge gravitational
influence on anything going on in that
zone as Jupiter did in our solar system.
It stirred up the asteroid belt and
prevented planet 5 forming between Mars
and Jupiter. the uh chaotic motion kept
being increased with lot of elliptical
orbits leading to high-speed collisions
which were more destructive than
accretive. So, planet building was
slowed right down. And in fact, most of
the material probably got ejected out
and gobbled up by Jupiter, uh, leaving
us just with the fragments left, uh, in
the form of our asteroid belt. And it's
likely that that's happened here,
certainly in the outer part of what's
marked as the habitable zone. Plus, it's
quite likely that it also stole a lot of
the volatile material from that zone
with its uh very large gravity, and it
may well have denuded any potential
planets in there of things like water.
So, it's not looking great for sort of
an Earthlike planet uh orbiting around,
but it's just possible in that inner
edge of the habitable zone that there
might be one. And based on that fairly
slim probability,
we've actually sent some messages there.
Two radio messages were sent out using
the 70 meter dish, the new uh Ptoria
planetary radar. And uh the first of
these, the teenage message was sent in
2001. And then two years later, the
second cosmic call was sent out. And uh
the first one gets there in 2047.
Obviously, it'll be a 2-year delay
before the other one gets there. The
speed of light being what it is. And so,
uh, even if those are then intercepted,
it'll be another 45 years or more before
there's any form of reply. Uh, so this
is, uh, not exactly a two-way
conversation. Um, but it would be
interesting. You never know. Maybe in
that time we will discover one of those
terrestrial planets on the interior
orbit.
So that's it. Thank you very much for
listening to this one and I hope to
catch you on the next one.